---
title: Intel X86 Instructions
date created: Friday, May 12th 2023, 5:07:55 pm
date modified: Saturday, November 9th 2024, 7:20:59 am
---

# Intel X86 Instructions

i486:

Compare and Exchange (CMPXCHG) with LOCK prefix for atomic swaps.
Exchange and Add (XADD) with LOCK prefix for atomic swaps.

Pentium II:

Compare and Exchange 8 bytes (CMPXCHG8B) with LOCK prefix for atomic
swaps on 8 byte data.

MMX instructions (SIMD):

MMX supports 8 registers (MM0-MM8) that are 64-bit integers that support
saturated integer operations. This allowed Pentium processors to do
instructions on multiple words at once (since most words were 32-bit at
the time).

MMX instructions are prefixed with p, like `PADDB` for `add packed byte
integers` instead of `ADDB`.

SSE instructions (SIMD):

Pentium III:

SSE was introduced as MMX instructions for floating point. SSE added
eight 128-bit registers (XMM0-XMM7). In SSE, these are four 32-bit
floats.

SSE2 expanded the registers to either be:

- Two 64-bit floating point numbers (double)
- Two 64-bit integers (int64_t)
- Four 32-bit integers (int32_t)
- Eight 16-bit short integers (int16_t)
- Sixteen 8-bit chars (char)

Pentium IV:

Pentium IV introduced SSE2, which merged the previous SSE and MMX
extensions by allowing SSE registers to be 128-bit integers as well, not
just floats.

Sandy Bridge:

Sandy Bridge added AVX instructions (Advanced Vector Extensions) which
holds 256-bit registers named (YMM0-YMM7). Each register can hold:

- Eight 32-bit single-precision floats
- Four 64-bit single-precision floats

Haswell:

AVX2, which adds vector operations on 256-bit registers.

Skylake:

AVX-512, which adds 512-bit registers and operations on them.

## Bit Manipulation

- POPCNT (Population count, the amount of set bits in a bitset)
- LZCNT (Leading zeros count, the amount of zeroes until a 1 is
    reached from the left).

Trailing Bit manipulation, like extracting from the right hand side.

## Cryptographic Instructions

- AES
- RDRAND, RDSEED
- SHA instructions

## Speed

Compare and Swap is ~20 cycles on modern kaby lake hardware.
