---
title: Wisdom
date created: Sunday, April 28th 2024, 8:47:12 am
date modified: Saturday, December 7th 2024, 6:43:54 pm
---
# Wisdom

When the anecdotes and the data disagree, the anecdotes are usually
right. - Jeff Bezos

At a meeting at Amazon, some of the execs were arguing about the
customer service experience. Metrics indicated that most calls were
picked up within a minute, but there were many complaints that calls
would take minutes before being answered. During the meeting, Jeff
picked up the phone and called the customer service line and waited > 10
minutes to get an answer. It's easy to fool yourself with metrics, it's
hard to fool yourself with anecdotes.

- Test your Hypotheses

Stanley Tang from Doordash found what to do by asking his favorite
macaroon store in Palo Alto what troubles they were having. The store
showed reams of unfulfilled phone in orders that couldn't be done
because the owner had no delivery drivers, no way to keep track of the
orders (outside of pencil and paper), etc. So he talked to other small
businesses and found the same problem was common. But they didn't really
know if it was a problem worth pursuing.

- Launch fast

They created a website in a day called Palo Alto Delivery, found some
restaurant menu PDFs and attached it to the site, and added their phone
number to the website to take orders. It looked like this:

![Palo Alto Delivery](../img/palo-alto-delivery.png)

- Do things that don't scale

They then fulfilled all the orders themselves, figured out how to talk
to customers, and used google docs to keep track of orders, dispatched
drivers and figured out how to route them with apple's find my friends,
and took orders with square. Hacking together solutions to get off the
ground helped them iterate, gained a lot of knowledge on how to make the
driver dispatch algorithms and how to scale the business.

- Focus

When Jobs returned to apple in 1997, he was battered by weeks of product
review sessions informing him of all the new products apple had launched
since he was ousted. He had enough and shouted "Stop! This is crazy."
He grabbed a marker and wrote this on a nearby whiteboard.

| -        | Consumer | Pro |
|----------|----------|-----|
| Desktop  |          |     |
| Portable |          |     |

Apple should focus on four great products. The rest of them should be
canceled.

Deciding what not to do is as important as deciding what to do. That's
true for companies, and it's true for products.

Jobs gave the same advice to Page.

Figure out what Google wants to be when it grows up, he told Page. It's
now all over the map. What are the five products you want to focus on?
Get rid of the rest, because they’re dragging you down. They're turning
you into Microsoft. They’re causing you to turn out products that are
adequate but not great.

- Simplify

Steve Jobs learned to admire simplicity when working at Atari. Atari
games came with no manual and needed to be simple enough for anyone to
play without instruction. The only instructions for a Star Trek game
were:

1. Insert quarter
2. Avoid Klingons

It takes a lot of hard work to make something simple, to truly
understand the underlying challenges and come up with elegant solutions.

On apple devices, they removed the power button. iDVD, used to burn
DVDs, would allow you to drag a file onto a window to burn that file to
a DVD.

Jobs wanted users to be able to navigate from any screen to any other
screen in 3 clicks.

- Take Responsibility End to End

Integrated devices are simpler. Own the entire experience, from the
chips, hardware, software, to the distribution, in Apple stores.

"People are busy. They have other things to do than think about how to
integrate their computers and devices"

Being in the apple ecosystem was like walking in a Zen garden in Kyoto.

- When behind, Leapfrog

Apple started out way behind many times in its lifetime. Personal
Computing, music, cell phones. With the iMac, it couldn't burn CDs, a
huge problem for creatives. Instead, it leapfrogged them with the iTunes
store and iPod ecosystem, connecting to a computer.

As well, Jobs was famous for cannibalizing its products -- "If we don't
cannibalize ourselves, someone else will".

- Put Products Before Profits

"My passion has been to build an enduring company where people were
motivated motivated to make great products. Everything else was
secondary. Sure, it was great to make a profit, because that was what
allowed you to make great products. But the products, not the profits,
were were the motivation. Sculley flipped these priorities to where the
goal was to make money. It’s a subtle difference, but it ends up meaning
everything."

- Don't Be a Slave to Focus Groups

If I’d asked customers what they wanted, they would have told me, "A
faster horse!" - Henry Ford

Jobs didn't believe in market research to see what customers wanted. He
believed in his intuition, saying that "customers don't know what they
want until we've shown them."

"The people in the Indian countryside don’t use their intellect like we
do; they use their intuition instead."

- Bend Reality

"One day Jobs marched into the cubicle of Larry Kenyon, the engineer who
was working on the Macintosh operating system, and complained that it
was taking too long to boot up. Kenyon started to explain why reducing
the boot-up time wasn’t possible, but Jobs cut him off. “If it would
save a person’s life, could you find a way to shave 10 seconds off the
boot time?” he asked. Kenyon allowed that he probably could. Jobs went
to a whiteboard and showed that if five million people were using the
Mac and it took 10 seconds extra to turn it on every day, that added up
to 300 million or so hours a year—the equivalent of at least 100
lifetimes a year. After a few weeks Kenyon had the machine booting up 28
seconds faster."

- Impute

The unboxing experience of a product is critical to how people later
perceive the product. Unpacking is a ritual that heralded the glory of
the product. That's why Apple products had such a different unboxing
experience than other products of its time.

- Push for Perfection

Toy Story originally had an edgier and darker tone. John Lasseter and
Jobs both agreed to stop product and rewrote the story to make it
friendlier. Apple stores were once delayed so that store layouts could
be reorganized around activities and not product categories.

For the iPhone, it was originally in an aluminum case. Jobs went to Ive
and said "I didn't sleep last night, because I realized that I just
don't love it". Ive immediately saw that Jobs was right. The iPhone
should've been about the display, but the case competed with the display
instead of getting out of the way.

"Guys, you’ve killed yourselves over this design for the last nine
months, but we’re going to change it,” Jobs told Ive’s team. “We’re all
going to have to work nights and weekends, and if you want, we can hand
out some guns so you can kill us now."

When Jobs was a kid, he helped his father build a fence around their
backyard. His father told him to take as much care on the back as the
front. Nobody will know, the young Jobs said, but the senior responded
with "But you will know". A true craftsmen uses a good piece of wood
even for the back of a cabinet against the wall.

He did the same in the Apple II, where he rejected a circuit board
design because its chips didn't line up. The engineers complained that
no one would see the inside, but he retorted with his father's lesson.
Once the board was redesigned, he had the team's engineers names
engraved inside the case. "Real artists sign their work".

- Tolerate Only "A" Players

"I've learned over the years that when you have really good people, you
don't have to baby them". By expecting them to do great things, you can
get them to do great things.

Having polite managers allow mediocre people to feel comfortable
sticking around.

- Engage face to Face

Jobs believe in serendipity and designed the Pixar building to have
unplanned encounters and collaborations. He banned slideshows, since
they had people focus on bullet points instead of the bigger picture.
People who know what they're talking about don't need PowerPoint.

- Know Both the Big Picture and the Details

Jobs worked with the teams designing the silicon but also had a grand
vision of what the apple ecosystem should look like. In the 2010s,
everything would move to the cloud, and become a digital hub for
managing the user's content.

Sell, Design, Build is a maxim to building great products: <https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=36231581>
